[DataGridPro] Server side data source lazy loading (#13878)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/server-side-data/lazy-loading.md

Reviewer: Do you think we can keep showing previous data while loading? Like in https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#server-side-filtering-sorting-and-pagination
This seems to be a nicer UX to me.

Reviewer: Sorry, I forgot to mention: for example, when sort changes

Author: It is a bit more complicated than for the paginated data fetch
With pagination all rows are replaced with every new response
With lazy loading, fetched rows have to be injected at certain position.
At the moment, lazy loading hook only generates parameters for the data source which then based on the flag either sets new row list or replaces rows from certain index.
This means that the list cannot be kept, since it can happen that one row gets rendered twice (raising an error) before lazy loading hook can clean things up.

I agree that the grid looks too empty after user actions, so I see two options here:
1. Instead of clearing the grid, replace all rows with skeletons for the actions that need to fetch the first page again (filter change, invalid row count, etc..) and update the `addSkeletonRows` function to also do the cleanup, since the row count will probably decrease after filtering
2. Change the way new rows are added and move that responsibility to the lazy loading hook, which means that the data source hook will either replace the rows or send that as an event data to be handled elsewhere. In that case, lazy loading hook can clean things up before adding those rows

I am more for the option 1, but open for other suggestions

Author: I thought a bit more about this and I think that the best way to do this is to add additional prop called `unstable_onDataSourceResolve` that can be used to intercept and manipulate the way the new data is added to the grid. Default would be `setRows(getRowsResponse.rows)`.

There are couple of benefits:
- lazy loading can use this to replace row indexes while keeping the old rows until the new rows are ready.
- it gives developers the flexibility to use this for some other use cases they might have
- we don't have to have any lazy loading logic inside the dataSource hook

wdyt @cherniavskii @MBilalShafi

Reviewer: What would be the default behavior for `unstable_onDataSourceResolve`?

Reviewer 2: If you mean to decouple the grid row tree updates from the `useGridDataSource` hook and delegate it to the respective feature hooks, it makes sense to me. I even planned to do it in the very first PR but couldn't implement it back then.

Now that things have started to get a bit more complex, I would love to adapt that approach, but I'd prefer to use an event-emitting approach instead of adding a prop.

A high-level view of what I have in my mind:

```tsx
const useGridDataSource = (...params) => {
  // otherCode
  const fetchRows() => {
    const getRowsParams = getRowsParamsSelector();
    const cachedData = cache.get(getRowsParams);
    
    if (cachedData) {
    	apiRef.current.publishEvent('rowsFetched', cachedData);
		return;
    }
    
    const fetchedData = dataSource.getRows(getRowsParams);
    cache.set(getRowsParams, fetchedData);
    
    apiRef.current.publishEvent('rowsFetched', {params: getRowsParams, data: fetchedData});
  }
  
  const fetchChildren = (...args) => {
    // similar logic but the published event could be different, something like `childRowsFetched`
  }
}
```

Now listening to each specific event will be delegated to the specific hook. For example `useGridRows` could listen to `rowsFetched` and handle `apiRef.current.setXXX` stuff. In the case of `props.lazyLoading='true'`, `useGridLazyLoader` could take that role.

For `childRowsFetched`, either `useGridTreeData` or `useGridRowGrouping` would come into action based on `treeData` prop and row grouping state.

A few benefits to this approach:
1. Simplify the parent hook, keep only the generic stuff (useGridDataSource)
2. More code relevance (for example, code referring to the row grouping will be in the row grouping hook and in the premium package)
3. Scalable and easier to support exceptional cases like the one in question.
4. Easier customizability in the userland, since the users can listen and respond to these events too.

Does it make sense? I could even extract this change separately from this PR to make things smoother.

Author: Not sure if it is just a coincidence or you used it as an example, but there is already an event `rowsFetched` that I have added to respond to the data change in the lazy loading hook
`useGridApiEventHandler(privateApiRef, 'rowsFetched', handleDataUpdate);`

Also in my previous comment point 2 is what you have described with a bit more detail in your comment.
I am perfectly fine with extending this event to pass the relevant data as well

I think the important point is 
> Easier customizability in the userland, since the users can listen and respond to these events too.

there will probably be some other events and actions that have to work together with the data source in the user apps

Reviewer 2: Cool, nah I overlooked that.

So using the event with data could resolve the need for `unstable_onDataSourceResolve` prop, right?

> Also in my previous comment point 2 is what you have described with a bit more detail in your comment.

Yeah mostly aligned with the point no 2 you mentioned with difference that the rows tree updates would be handled by respective hooks rather than data source hook + some other hooks.

But yeah, I'd be in favour of this proposal. 👍

Reviewer: Not sure I follow how these events could be used by the users...
Can you give some examples?

Author: > So using the event with data could resolve the need for unstable_onDataSourceResolve prop, right?

yes, the good point is that the data source hook does not have to worry about how the data is rendered, but the bad part is that each hook has to know about the other hook to know when it is its turn to render (`useGridRows` has to check `lazyLoading` flag)

To answer on
> Not sure I follow how these events could be used by the users...
Can you give some examples?

I was thinking
You can send the event to retry the request (this is already in place in the error demo)
You can listen to the event to update UI outside of the grid (if needed)

with resolve callback, you get even more control since you can intercept and completely stop the rendering (with the events, there will always be at least one hook that processes the data)

Now, to answer to
> What would be the default behavior for unstable_onDataSourceResolve?

Default would be to `setRows(getRowsResponse.rows)` like it does now.

Passing a function would mean that the data source hook will not do anything, but just pass the result. User can choose to process it a bit further and then (partially) render it or even discard it completely.

also, since we already have `onDataSourceError`, it doesn't seem strange to have the resolve callback as well.

Author: ended up extending grid processing strategy with a new group `dataSource`
based on the active strategy either data source hook or lazy loading hook are taking care of request processing and sorting/filtering/pagination change event processing
This can be combined with the tree data and grouping strategies to handle nested data lazy loading in the future

Author: And yes, after all these comments
> Do you think we can keep showing previous data while loading?

This is done now 🙂

Reviewer 2: How about deprecating the existing [`infinite loading`](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#infinite-loading) and [`lazy loading`](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#lazy-loading) in favor of data source infinite loading and viewport loading? 

Or do they still make sense for some use-cases not possible with data source based implementation?

Author: I think that we should do it once the whole data source is stable. Otherwise we are saying to the users that they should move to unstable API

Reviewer 2: I was thinking of doing that for the v8 pre-release. As a general rule, we decided to move new features from `unstable_` to stable in ~2 months. That is why I added an item in https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/13188 to mark it as stable.
After lazy loading is delivered, there'll only be aggregation and editing left in the major features and we might want to make already delivered ones stable.
If we decide against it for now, it makes sense to delay deprecating the existing features.

Author: Added deprecation warning on the sections and `deprecated` block tags to the relevant props

Author: Deprecation will be reverted and added as an action point to https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/15488

title: React Server-side lazy loading
---

# Data Grid - Server-side lazy loading [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

<p class="description">Row lazy-loading with server-side data source.</p>

Lazy Loading changes the way pagination works by removing page controls and loading data dynamically (in a single list) as the user scrolls through the grid.

It is enabled by adding `lazyLoading` prop in combination with `unstable_dataSource` prop.

Initially, the first page data is fetched and displayed in the grid. What triggers the loading of next page data depends on the value of the total row count.

> If the total row count is known, the grid gets filled with skeleton rows and fetches more data if one of the skeleton rows falls into the rendering context.

Reviewer 2: IIRC, we prefer to use full product names rather than the shortened ones. 
CC @samuelsycamore 
```suggestion
If the total row count is known, the Data Grid gets filled with skeleton rows and fetches more data if one of the skeleton rows falls into the rendering context.
This loading strategy is often referred to as [**viewport loading**](#viewport-loading).
```

Reviewer 3: +1 - you could also just write "Grid" if it's too repetitive to say "Data Grid" over and over, but either way it's preferable to capitalize it to make it clear that it's the MUI X product specifically.

> If the total row count is unknown, the grid fetches more data when the user scrolls to the bottom of the grid. This loading strategy is often referred to as **infinite loading**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the total row count is unknown, the Data Grid fetches more data when the user scrolls to the bottom. This loading strategy is often referred to as [**infinite loading**](#infinite-loading).
```

:::info

> Row count can be provided either by returning the `rowCount` in the response of the `getRows` method in `unstable_dataSource`, via the `rowCount` prop or by calling [`setRowCount`](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/#grid-api-prop-setRowCount) API.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: Might combine two callouts into one.
```suggestion
Row count can be provided in either of the following ways.

- Pass as `rowCount` prop
- Return `rowCount` by the `getRows` method
- Set the `rowCount` using the [`setRowCount`](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/#grid-api-prop-setRowCount) API method.

The above list is given in the order of precedence, which means if the row count is set using the API, that value gets overridden once a new value is returned by the `getRows` method, even if it is `undefined`.
```

:::

:::warning
Order of precedence for the row count:

- `rowCount` prop
- `rowCount` returned by the `getRows` method
- row count set using the `setRowCount` API

> This means that, if the row count is set using the API, that value gets overridden once a new value is returned by the `getRows` method, even if it is `undefined`.

Reviewer 2: > even if it is `undefined`

Does that mean that even if there's no `rowCount` returned from the `getRows` call (equivalent to being `undefined`), the previous value set using the API method will be replaced?

Could that be against some users' expectations? 🤔

Author: The problem is, we use `undefined` to say that you don't know the row count. That switches the grid into infinite loading mode.
If you set the value trough API and then make another call and give back undefined as `rowCount`, does it mean
1. Row count became unknown
2. Do not update row count

RIght now, it works as point 1.
If you know row count, but it is not returned by the response, you can always do this
```
getRows: async (params: GridGetRowsParams) => {
  const urlParams = new URLSearchParams({
    ...
  });
  const getRowsResponse = await fetchRows(
    ...
  );

  return {
    rows: getRowsResponse.rows,
    rowCount: myCountVar
  };
},
```

I see setting the page count through API more as way to postpone count and update it after the data is fetched. Ideally, your server should return it with the data

Reviewer 2: There could be cases when the `rowCount` is not accompanied by the regular server call to fetch a page, e.g. when it's expensive on the server to compute row count (Imagine data stored as a linked list, it's needed to be completely traversed to know actual `rowCount`)
In those cases, it should be possible to skip `rowCount` update on each `getRows` call, rather the user could separately fetch it and set using the imperative API.

What do you think about only treating `-1` as an unknown row count?

It will also be consistent with the [client side pagination](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/pagination/#index-based-pagination) which explicitly requires `rowCount=-1` to consider the grid in unknown or estimated row count mode.

Author: Updated.
New condition for the row update
`response.rowCount !== undefined || pageRowCount === undefined`
not passing rowCount while it is not even set, results in setting it to `-1`

> :::warning
> Order of precedence for the row count:
> 
> - `rowCount` prop
> - `rowCount` returned by the `getRows` method
> - row count set using the `setRowCount` API
> 
> This means that, if the row count is set using the API, that value gets overridden once a new value is returned by the `getRows` method, even if it is `undefined`.
> :::

Reviewer 2: Linked with the other comment.
```suggestion
```

## Viewport loading

The viewport loading mode is enabled when the row count is known (`rowCount >= 0`). Grid fetches the first page immediately and adds skeleton rows to match the total row count. Other pages are fetched once the user starts scrolling and moves a skeleton row inside the rendering context (index range defined by [Virtualization](/x/react-data-grid/virtualization/)).

> If the user scrolls too fast, the grid loads multiple pages with one request (by adjusting `start` and `end` param) in order to reduce the server load.

Reviewer 2: I'd love to have a section about the chunking we do to optimize the caching and reduce backend calls for the lazy loading use cases. Do you think it makes sense to add one?

Author: yes, I will add this in the data source overview docs, since it is applicable everywhere

> In addition to this, the grid throttles new requests made to the data source after each rendering context change. This can be controlled with `lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs` prop.

Reviewer 2: Would it be useful to add a sub-section with a demo to demonstrate `lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs` prop?

Author: Added [here](https://deploy-preview-13878--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/lazy-loading/#request-throttling)

:::info
The data source demos use a utility function `useMockServer` to simulate the server-side data fetching.
In a real-world scenario, you should replace this with your own server-side data-fetching logic.

Open info section of the browser console to see the requests being made and the data being fetched in response.
:::

## Infinite loading

The infinite loading mode is enabled when the row count is unknown (`-1` or `undefined`). New page is loaded when the scroll reaches the bottom of the viewport area.

The area which triggers the new request can be changed using `scrollEndThreshold`.

The demo below shows the infinite loading mode. Page size is set to `15` and the mock server is configured to return a total of `100` rows. Once the response does not contain any new rows, the grid stops requesting new data.

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingInfinite.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Updating the loading mode

The grid changes the loading mode dynamically if the total row count gets updated in any of the three ways described above.

Based on the previous and the new value for the total row count, the following scenarios are possible:

> - **Unknown `rowCount` to known `rowCount`**: If row count is not unknown anymore, the grid switches to the viewport loading mode. It checks the amount of allready fetched rows and adds skeleton rows to match the total row count.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Unknown `rowCount` to known `rowCount`**: When the row count is set to a valid value from an unknown value, the Data Grid switches to the viewport loading mode. It checks the number of already fetched rows and adds skeleton rows to match the provided row count.
```

> - **Known `rowCount` to unknown `rowCount`**: If the row count is updated and set to `-1`, the grid resets, fetches the first page and sets itself in the infinite loading mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Known `rowCount` to unknown `rowCount`**: If the row count is updated and set to `-1`, the Data Grid resets, fetches the first page, and sets itself in the infinite loading mode.
```

- **Known `rowCount` greater than the actual row count**: This can happen either by reducing the value of the row count after more rows were already fetched or if the row count was unknown and the grid in the inifite loading mode already fetched more rows. In this case, the grid resets, fetches the first page and continues in one of the modes depending on the new value of the `rowCount`.

:::warning
`rowCount` is expected to be static. Changing its value can cause the grid to reset and the cache to be cleared which leads to poor performance and user experience.
:::

The demo below serves more as a showcase of the behavior described above and is not representing something you would implement in a real-world scenario.

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingModeUpdate.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Nested rows 🚧

:::warning
This feature isn't implemented yet. It's coming.

👍 Upvote [issue #14527](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/14527) if you want to see it land faster.

Don't hesitate to leave a comment on the same issue to influence what gets built. Especially if you already have a use case for this feature, or if you are facing a pain point with your current solution.
:::

> When completed, it will be possible to use `lazyLoading` flag in combination with [Tree data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/tree-data/) and [Row grouping](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/row-grouping/).

Reviewer 2: To fix vale warning
```suggestion
When completed, it would be possible to use `lazyLoading` flag in combination with [Tree data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/tree-data/) and [Row grouping](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/row-grouping/).
```

The demo below shows the viewport loading mode.

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingViewport.js", "bg": "inline"}}

:::info
The data source demos use a utility function `useMockServer` to simulate the server-side data fetching.
In a real-world scenario, you should replace this with your own server-side data-fetching logic.

Open info section of the browser console to see the requests being made and the data being fetched in response.
:::

### Request throttling

While user is scrolling through the grid, rendering context changes and the Data Grid tries to fill in any missing rows by making a new data source request. This avoid making huge amount of request, Data Grid throttles new data fetches on the rendering context change. By default throttle is set to 500 ms, but the time can be controlled with `lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs` prop.

The demo below shows the difference in behavior for different values of the `lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs` prop. In the footer of the Data Grid, you can see the amount of requests made while scrolling.

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingRequestThrottle.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Infinite loading

> The infinite loading mode is enabled when the row count is unknown (`-1` or `undefined`). New page is loaded when the scroll reaches the bottom of the viewport area.

Author: Correct.
If the row count is undefined, it gets set to `-1` by the hook, to allow other processings to take place

title: React Server-side lazy loading
---

# Data Grid - Server-side lazy loading [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

> <p class="description">Row lazy-loading with server-side data source.</p>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<p class="description">Learn how to implement lazy-loading rows with a server-side data source.</p>
```

> Lazy Loading changes the way pagination works by removing page controls and loading data dynamically (in a single list) as the user scrolls through the grid.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Lazy loading changes the way pagination works by removing page controls and loading data dynamically (in a single list) as the user scrolls through the grid.
```

> It is enabled by adding `unstable_lazyLoading` prop in combination with `unstable_dataSource` prop.

Reviewer 3: passive -> active voice 

```suggestion
You can enable it with the `unstable_lazyLoading` prop paired with the `unstable_dataSource` prop.
```

> Initially, the first page data is fetched and displayed in the grid. What triggers the loading of next page data depends on the value of the total row count.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initially, data for the first page is fetched and displayed in the grid.
The value of the total row count determines when the next page's data is loaded:
```

> If the total row count is known, the Data Grid gets filled with skeleton rows and fetches more data if one of the skeleton rows falls into the rendering context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If the total row count is known, the Data Grid is filled with skeleton rows and fetches more data if one of the skeleton rows falls into the rendering context.
```

> This loading strategy is often referred to as [**viewport loading**](#viewport-loading).

Reviewer 3: I think the indentation will make it part of the list item above? 😅 That's my goal anyway.

```suggestion
   This loading strategy is often referred to as [**viewport loading**](#viewport-loading).
```

> If the total row count is unknown, the Data Grid fetches more data when the user scrolls to the bottom. This loading strategy is often referred to as [**infinite loading**](#infinite-loading).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If the total row count is unknown, the Data Grid fetches more data when the user scrolls to the bottom. 
   This loading strategy is often referred to as [**infinite loading**](#infinite-loading).
```

:::info

> Row count can be provided in either of the following ways.

Reviewer 3: - passive -> active voice
- "either" implies a binary decision - one or the other - but we have three options here

```suggestion
You can provide the row count through one of the following ways:
```

> - Pass as [`rowCount`](/x/api/data-grid/data-grid/#data-grid-prop-rowCount) prop

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Pass it as the [`rowCount`](/x/api/data-grid/data-grid/#data-grid-prop-rowCount) prop
```

- Return `rowCount` in the `getRows` method of the [data source](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#data-source)

> - Set the `rowCount` using the [`setRowCount`](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/#grid-api-prop-setRowCount) API method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Set the `rowCount` using the [`setRowCount`](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/#grid-api-prop-setRowCount) API method
```

> The above list is given in the order of precedence, which means if the row count is set using the API, that value gets overridden once a new value is returned by the `getRows` method, unless if it is `undefined`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These options are presented in order of precedence, which means if the row count is set using the API, that value is overridden once a new value is returned by the `getRows` method unless it's `undefined`.
```

:::

## Viewport loading

> The viewport loading mode is enabled when the row count is known (`rowCount >= 0`). Grid fetches the first page immediately and adds skeleton rows to match the total row count. Other pages are fetched once the user starts scrolling and moves a skeleton row inside the rendering context (index range defined by [Virtualization](/x/react-data-grid/virtualization/)).

Reviewer 3: - one sentence per line

```suggestion
Viewport loading mode is enabled when the row count is known (and is greater than or equal to zero).
The Grid fetches the first page immediately and adds skeleton rows to match the total row count. 
Other pages are fetched once the user starts scrolling and moves a skeleton row inside the rendering context (with the index range defined by [virtualization](/x/react-data-grid/virtualization/)).
```

> If the user scrolls too fast, the grid loads multiple pages with one request (by adjusting `start` and `end` param) in order to reduce the server load.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the user scrolls too fast, the Grid loads multiple pages with one request (by adjusting `start` and `end` parameters) to reduce the server load.
```

> The demo below shows the viewport loading mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The demo below shows how viewport loading mode works:
```

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingViewport.js", "bg": "inline"}}

:::info

> The data source demos use a utility function `useMockServer` to simulate the server-side data fetching.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data source demos use a `useMockServer` utility function to simulate server-side data fetching.
```

Author: This is copied from the other page, so I will update other occurrences as well

> In a real-world scenario, you should replace this with your own server-side data-fetching logic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a real-world scenario you would replace this with your own server-side data-fetching logic.
```

> Open info section of the browser console to see the requests being made and the data being fetched in response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open the Info section of your browser console to see the requests being made and the data being fetched in response.
```

:::

### Request throttling

> While user is scrolling through the grid, rendering context changes and the Data Grid tries to fill in any missing rows by making a new server request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a user scrolls through the Grid, the rendering context changes and the Grid tries to fill in any missing rows by making a new server request.
```

> The Data Grid throttles new data fetches on the rendering context change to avoid doing unnecessary requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It also throttles new data fetches to avoid making unnecessary requests.
```

> The default throttle time is 500 milliseconds, use `unstable_lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs` prop to customize it, as the following example demonstrates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The default throttle time is 500 milliseconds.
Use the `unstable_lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs` prop to set a custom time, as shown below:
```

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingRequestThrottle.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Infinite loading

> The infinite loading mode is enabled when the row count is unknown (`-1` or `undefined`). New page is loaded when the scroll reaches the bottom of the viewport area.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Infinite loading mode is enabled when the row count is unknown (either `-1` or `undefined`). 
A new page is loaded when the scroll reaches the bottom of the viewport area.
```

> The area which triggers the new request can be changed using `scrollEndThreshold`.

Reviewer 3: passive -> active voice

```suggestion
You can use the `scrollEndThreshold` prop to change the area that triggers new requests.
```

> The demo below shows the infinite loading mode. Page size is set to `15` and the mock server is configured to return a total of `100` rows. Once the response does not contain any new rows, the grid stops requesting new data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The demo below shows how infinite loading mode works. 
Page size is set to `15` and the mock server is configured to return a total of 100 rows. 
When the response contains no new rows, the Grid stops requesting new data.
```

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingInfinite.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Updating the loading mode

> The grid changes the loading mode dynamically if the total row count gets updated in any of the three ways described above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Grid changes the loading mode dynamically if the total row count gets updated in any of the three ways described above.
```

Reviewer 3: Where and when were these "three ways" described above already? 😅 I've lost track by the time I've reached this point in the doc—maybe we can briefly reiterate them and/or link back to the section where they're described?

Author: I have reiterated "the ways"

Based on the previous and the new value for the total row count, the following scenarios are possible:

> - **Unknown `rowCount` to known `rowCount`**: When the row count is set to a valid value from an unknown value, the Data Grid switches to the viewport loading mode. It checks the number of already fetched rows and adds skeleton rows to match the provided row count.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Unknown `rowCount` to known `rowCount`**: When the row count is set to a valid value from an unknown value, the Data Grid switches to viewport loading mode. It checks the number of already fetched rows and adds skeleton rows to match the provided row count.
```

> - **Known `rowCount` to unknown `rowCount`**: If the row count is updated and set to `-1`, the Data Grid resets, fetches the first page, and sets itself in the infinite loading mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Known `rowCount` to unknown `rowCount`**: If the row count is updated and set to `-1`, the Data Grid resets, fetches the first page, then sets itself to infinite loading mode.
```

> - **Known `rowCount` greater than the actual row count**: This can happen either by reducing the value of the row count after more rows were already fetched or if the row count was unknown and the grid in the inifite loading mode already fetched more rows. In this case, the grid resets, fetches the first page and continues in one of the modes depending on the new value of the `rowCount`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Known `rowCount` greater than the actual row count**: This can happen either by reducing the value of the row count after more rows were already fetched, or if the row count was unknown and the Grid (while in the infinite loading mode) already fetched more rows. In this case, the Grid resets, fetches the first page, and then continues in one mode or the other depending on the new value of the `rowCount`.
```

:::warning

> `rowCount` is expected to be static. Changing its value can cause the grid to reset and the cache to be cleared which may lead to performance and UX degradation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`rowCount` is expected to be static. 
Changing its value can cause the Grid to reset and the cache to be cleared which may lead to performance and UX degradation.
```

:::

> The demo below serves more as a showcase of the behavior described above and is not representing something you would implement in a real-world scenario.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The demo below serves as a showcase of the behavior described above, and is not representative of something you would implement in a real-world scenario.
```

{{"demo": "ServerSideLazyLoadingModeUpdate.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Nested lazy loading 🚧

:::warning
This feature isn't implemented yet. It's coming.

👍 Upvote [issue #14527](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/14527) if you want to see it land faster.

> Don't hesitate to leave a comment on the same issue to influence what gets built. Especially if you already have a use case for this feature, or if you are facing a pain point with your current solution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Don't hesitate to leave a comment on the issue to help influence what gets built—especially if you already have a use case for this feature, or if you're facing a specific pain point with your current solution.
```

:::

> When completed, it would be possible to use `unstable_lazyLoading` flag in combination with [Tree data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/tree-data/) and [Row grouping](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/row-grouping/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When completed, it will be possible to use the `unstable_lazyLoading` flag in combination with [tree data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/tree-data/) and [row grouping](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/row-grouping/).
```

## Error handling

> To handle errors, use `unstable_onDataSourceError` prop as described in the [Error handling](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#error-handling) section of the data source overview page.

Reviewer 3: Here's how I like to see specific sections of docs referenced (not sure if this best practice is actually documented anywhere)

```suggestion
To handle errors, use the `unstable_onDataSourceError` prop as described in [Server-side data—Error handling](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#error-handling).
```

Author: well, we can start here :)

> Second parameter of type `GridGetRowsParams` can be passed to `getRows` method of the [`unstable_dataSource`](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/#grid-api-prop-unstable_dataSource) to retry the request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can pass the second parameter of type `GridGetRowsParams` to the `getRows` method of the [`unstable_dataSource`](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/#grid-api-prop-unstable_dataSource) to retry the request.
```
